Disaster-induced Disruption of Policies for Informal Urban Settlements
Abstract
The global phenomenon of rapid urbanisation has increased the number of people living in Informal Urban Settlements (IUS). Many of their inhabitants are also victims of disaster-induced displacements due to complete loss or government-led relocation programs. The disaster or land-use management policies do not usually tackle the associated vulnerabilities of these informal settlers. Therefore, this research investigates the use case of a disaster-prone city in Colombia, where the policies and their implications at different levels (national to local) are analysed for IUS. To do so, we study the relationship between land use and disaster management policies in the case study of Mocoa in Colombia, examining its 2017 disaster as a disruptor event. The dissection of existing policies and their effectiveness revealed a lack of community engagement in the planning process and in addressing the issues associated with the vulnerabilities of IUS. Conclusions and recommendations are proposed to target community engagement in the planning process after comparing the policies and their challenges before and after the disaster.
Keywords: Informal urban settlements, Disaster recovery policies, Disaster-prone cities, Urban growth

1. Introduction
With over 1 billion people living in informal settlements worldwide in 2020 and a continuous increase in this number (UN-Habitat, 2022), informal urban growth has been a challenge that some cities worldwide have seen in the past decades and one that will continue. Informal settlements are households that do not provide a dignified living to their inhabitants and are established without a formal occupation process. They have been named in many ways: slums, ghettos, shantytowns, favelas, encampments, tugurios, villas miseria, or subnormal neighbourhoods. According to United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 11 (UN-Habitat, 2018), a slum is a household that lacks at least one of the following: access to an improved water source, access to improved sanitation facilities, sufficient living area, housing durability, and security of tenure. 
Rapid urbanisation has led to a growth of the urban footprint of cities worldwide. Such is the case of Kampala, Uganda, where in ten years (2010-2020), the urban growth projection is 422.8 Ha (Pérez-Molina et al., 2017) or the case of Santo Tomé, Argentina, where the city is expanding rapidly towards hazardous areas (Hardoy et al., 2019). Similar processes happened in other cities: Guatemala City, Guatemala (Morales et al., 2019); Maputo, Mozambique (World-Bank, 2021), amongst many others in the global south where this growth was principally driven by informal settlements on the outskirts and peripheries (UN-Habitat, 2015). Most of these settlements were created through migration from rural to urban areas, which often meant forced displacement or lack of affordable housing options (UN-Habitat, 2017).
Despite a global effort to reduce disaster losses and damages, rapid urbanisation and environmental degradation have increased global disaster risk (CRED et al., 2016). Particularly, informal urban growth has challenged these efforts as many informal settlements are located in highly hazardous areas in disaster-prone cities (Magalhães et al., 2016). This is notably perilous as many of their households may be structurally vulnerable or house socially vulnerable people (Jankowska et al., 2011). Their capacity to react to a disaster is limited due to their characteristics and lack of cohesion with their local governments. They are often the most affected and are likely to suffer more significant damages when facing disasters (Miles et al., 2012).
To confront this issue, governments have incorporated disaster risk reduction measures in their land use plans (Brinkley & Stahmer, 2021; Herrmann‐Lunecke & Villagra, 2020). However, they often limit the measures to reduce disaster risk in informal settlements to legalisation or relocation. The effectiveness of land-use planning in reducing the disaster risk of Informal Urban Settlements (IUS1) has often been challenged. Even though governments establish that land-use planning can be a tool that helps to bring together the informal urban settlements and the city's development plans, it is often not enough (Doberstein & Stager, 2013; Lizarralde, 2014; Miles et al., 2012). Some researchers, such as Aguilar and Santos (2011), divulge that land-use planning alone is insufficient if there is no widespread tenure or the government fails to consider informal settlements. Some studies even suggest that the legalisation and land regulations of settlements incentivise IUS's growth (Goytia et al., 2023).
The main objective of this study is to better understand the relationship between land use and disaster management policies surrounding informality in a disaster-prone city and the impact that a disaster may have on them. The extension and coverage of these policies from a national to a local point of view are analysed using the city of Mocoa in Colombia as the case study. Colombia's limited land use and disaster management policies were critically reviewed and analysed to understand the changes before and after the 2017 debris flow disaster of Mocoa. The potential appearance of IUS has not always been considered within the Land-Use Plans (POT or PBOT2) or the Municipal Development Plans of cities. However, as the IUSs have appeared and grown, cities have started incorporating them in their land use plans. This research contributes a reflection of effective and ineffective planning policies surrounding informal settlements. Specifically, this research focuses on whether a disaster disrupted these existing policies, how profound this disruption was, and challenges the evolution of these policies.
This article is structured into six sections. Section 1 introduces the IUS phenomenon and the importance of their consideration in land use planning. It is followed by Section 2, which includes a description of the study area and its 2017 Disaster. Afterwards, in Section 3, we present a review of national to local policies surrounding IUS and their evolution over time. In Section 4, we then present the analysis of the public policies in the study area around IUS, focusing on the disasters' impact on them. Section 5 presents the discussion, where we assess the implementation and effectiveness of policies. Finally, Section 6 draws the main conclusions from the analysis and discussions, highlighting the importance of participatory planning to avoid significant hurdles while creating an effective and resilient land use plan.
1.1 Informal Urban Settlements in Colombia
Latin America and the Caribbean have presented a rapid increase in urbanisation over the past decades and are one of the most urbanised developing regions in the world, with over 80% of its population living in urban areas and cities (CEPAL, 2017). In Colombia, forced displacement and migration have increased the urban problems associated with poverty and have forced settlements to be created in hazardous areas around cities (OECD, 2019).
Usually, the informal urban settlements around Colombian cities, which are comprised of groups of people from many cultural backgrounds and similar economic levels, are vibrant communities (Lizarralde, 2014). The problems associated with these communities, such as lack of land tenure or difficulty in accessing goods and services, are frequently overseen or dismissed as consequences of their informality. However, the inhabitants of IUS in disaster-prone cities face an even bigger issue: their exposure and vulnerability to disasters are higher than in formal settlements, and their governments do not offer proper strategies to address them (OECD, 2019). In Colombia, informal urban settlements correspond to around 25% of the built-up area, with almost 5 million inhabitants (OECD, 2022).
There is a categorisation in Colombia when discussing informal settlements that name them deprived households. According to the National Administrative Department of Statistics (DANE), deprived households may have either quantitative or qualitative deficits (DANE, 2021). Quantitative deficit refers to households that present structural and space deficiencies and are not habitable; these deficiencies are not improvable. On the other hand, qualitative deficit refers to households with non-structural deficiencies that are improvable to achieve habitability. In Colombia, 31% of the households are deprived; 23.5% present qualitative deficit, and 7.5% quantitative deficit (DANE, 2021). The following section presents the capital city of one of Colombia's most deprived regions, which has 39.8% of deprived households. 


2. Study Area and Disaster
2.1 Study area
Mocoa is a city located in southwestern Colombia, in the Amazonian Piedmont. Mocoa is the capital city of the Department of Putumayo. Mocoa's extension is approximately 1,263 km2, with 580 km2 in urban and 740 km2 in rural areas and a population of around 58,000 inhabitants in 2020 (DANE, 2020). Located between the Andes and the Amazon (see 
Figure 1), this region is characterised by short, high-intensity rainfalls (Prada-Sarmiento et al., 2019). 
Characterised for historically being one of the most violent regions of Colombia in the early 2000s (Sánchez-Steiner, 2007), Mocoa has received a significant influx of migrants over the years, mainly due to internal conflict and internal displacement in the region. Between 1998 and 2016, Mocoa received around 34,000 displaced people (DNP, 2017). This led to an urban expansion in which six informal settlements were created in the periphery of the urban area: Via Guaduales, La Floresta, San Miguel, Emaús, Cinco de Enero, and Seis de Enero. Four more were created in the rural area: Caliyaco, Quince de Mayo, Porvenir, and Nueva Esperanza (Sánchez-Steiner, 2012). 

Fig. 1. Location of the study area and its informal urban settlements in 2016. The numbers on the figure correspond to the following informal urban settlements: 1. La Floresta, 2. Via Guaduales, 3. San Miguel, 4. Emaús, 5. Cinco de Enero, 6. Seis de Enero, 7. Quince de Mayo, 8. Porvenir, 9. Nueva Esperanza. The IUS number 1 and 4 no longer exist, and number 3 has been severely downsized due to the disaster. The IUS number 2 no longer exists as it was redeveloped around 2013. 

2.2 The 2017 disaster of Mocoa, Colombia
On the night of the 31st of March 2017, after many hours of heavy rainfall, which was 10.3 times more than the annual average (Prada-Sarmiento et al., 2019), a series of movements came to the city through the Taruca Creek and the Mulato and Sangoyaco rivers. 
The debris flows affected 48 neighbourhoods of the city's urban and rural areas. The main affected area, shown in Figure 1, corresponds to what was known as the neighbourhoods of San Miguel, La Floresta, and Emaús, which merged into San Miguel. This city area was settled between 1999 and 2002 and continued growing until the 2017 disaster. Furthermore, in a series of interviews with elderly locals (SGC, 2018), a similar event that occurred in 1962 that affected the same area of San Miguel was commonly remembered. Back then, this area was just grasslands and the lands surrounding the creeks and rivers that were also affected by the 2017 event. Figure 2 presents images of the 1962 and 2017 events.
The municipality of Mocoa is in a highly hazardous area. The main pressing hazards are meteorological, hydrological, and hydrogeological. Over 80 disasters have been recorded in Mocoa since 1998 (DNP, 2017). The 2017 disaster amounted to the more significant losses overall. Table 1 summarises the losses caused by the disaster.
Table 1. Losses Summary of the Mocoa 2017 disaster (DNP, 2017).
Item
Count
Death toll
332
Missing people
77
Affected people
> 22,000
Damaged houses
1,462
The 2017 disaster was key in triggering the changes in recovery policies in Colombia. This disaster made the country realise there is no point in investing millions of dollars in recovery and reconstruction if it was not done resiliently. The National Office for Disaster Management of Colombia (UNGRD) shifted towards a prevention culture from a recovery one, meaning there is now more attention towards legalising IUS and relocating those living in hazardous areas.

3. Legislation, regulation, and policies review
To better understand the policy-making process and the different regulation levels in the municipality of Mocoa, we present Figure 3, where a simplified stakeholder's map displays the actors surrounding Mocoa's land-use and disaster governance from a national to a local perspective.
The stakeholder's map is divided into three administrative levels vertically: national, departmental, and municipal. It presents three big bodies at the top, corresponding to Colombia's national executive, legislative, and judiciary powers. The Congress of the Republic of Colombia has legislated several laws on land-use planning, territory ordering, disaster risk management, and, more recently, on legalising informal and subnormal settlements. On the other hand, the Presidency of the Republic of Colombia, using its many specialised ministries, regulates the laws through decrees. 
Finally, the Constitutional Court of Colombia plays a crucial role in upholding the constitutionality of laws, decrees, and other legislative acts, protecting the rights of citizens in Colombia. This high court has recognised the poor job that the government had done in identifying the Informal Urban Settlements and the displaced population living in them (Auto 373, 2016). 
Under the Office of the President, we find the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development amongst other ministries and the National Unit for Disaster Risk Management (UNGRD), which lies under the ministries and the National Department of Planning (DNP). Also, under the ministries, we find the National Environmental System (SINA), which coordinates the regional autonomous environmental authorities responsible for managing and conserving natural resources; Corpoamazonia is the environmental authority for the Amazon region of the country, which includes Mocoa.

Fig. 2. Multi-year imagery of the San Miguel area in Mocoa before and after the 2017 disaster. This figure presents this IUS's development, destruction and disappearance in Mocoa. The location of this area of interest is highlighted in Fig. 1. 

On the next administrative level, the Office of the Governor of Putumayo leads the Departmental Council for Risk Management and its popularly elected administrative corporation counterpart in the Departmental Assembly. The final administrative level in the lowest part of Figure 3 presents the Office of the Mayor of Mocoa, the Municipal Council for Risk Management, and the Municipal Council. In the following section, we present in chronological order the relevant laws and decrees in the Republic of Colombia surrounding land management, informal settlements, and disaster management at a national level.
Fig. 3. Simplified stakeholder's map of the 2017 Disaster in Mocoa. It presents the relevant legal and regulatory actors in Colombia surrounding Mocoa's land use and disaster governance for the 2017 Disaster from a national to a municipal perspective. 

3.1 National Policies review
All these actors work with Law 388 (1997), which mandates that all municipalities must create a Land Use Plan to establish a route for advancing their cities. This Law, which has had different adjustments, corrections, regulations, and additions throughout the years (Decree 3600 of 2007; Law 507 of 1999; Law 810 of 2003; Law 1537 of 2012; Law 2079 of 2021), is clear regarding a municipalities' management of their informal settlements. If possible, the municipalities need to improve and legalise the informal settlements. However, if they are located in hazardous or non-mitigable risk areas, these households must be relocated or moved onto Social Interest Housing, restricting re-settling. 
This Law establishes the legal framework for land management, land use, urban development, and territorial management. It does so by promoting citizens' participation in the land use planning process, cultural and environmental heritage protection, and sustainable management of resources. Two years later, Congress passed Law 507 of 1999, establishing that municipal councils must celebrate an open forum to citizens so prior consultation can occur before the study and analysis of a Land Use Plan, especially targeting the inclusion of Indigenous and Afro-descendant citizens so their collective, cultural, and territorial rights can be guaranteed. Law 810 of 2003 regulates the planning and permitting of urban officers to achieve transparency and efficiency in the urbanisation and construction processes. Furthermore, it also touches on the legalisation and titling processes of informal settlements, excluding the holder's dwellers' legalisation. Through Decree 564 of 2006, Colombia tried to regulate and control urban development compliance while protecting citizens' rights. This decree regulates construction permits, recognition of buildings, planning officers, and legalisation of settlements as Social Interest Housing. A similar rural counterpart was enacted through Decree 3600 of 2007, which regulates the rural land management and the development of urban actions of land plotting and construction in this type of land. It also establishes the requirements to develop rural land use management and defines the procedures for planning and permitting in rural land. 
In 2009, a major policy document was created through the National Council of Social and Economical Politics (CONPES), the CONPES 3604 document (DNP, 2009). The national government established guidelines for consolidating the neighbourhood improvement policy through this policy document. One of its main objectives was to guarantee land tenure, appropriate land uses, and disaster risk reduction in the intervened neighbourhoods through this new policy, which also aimed to prevent the growth of informal settlements across the country.
After creating laws and decrees that regulate the development of urban and rural areas in Colombia through a land-use lens, the Organic Law of Territorial Ordering was created through Law 1454 (2011). This Law aims to establish a legal framework for the territorial ordinance at a national level to achieve sustainable development. It defines the competencies and responsibilities of local authorities in territorial ordering; it promotes citizen participation in territorial planning and management processes and promotes the protection of cultural and environmental heritage. Part of the goal of sustainable development of this Law was the promotion of accessible housing. To achieve this, the Colombian government regulated the free transfer of urban assets towards developing Social Interest Housing (Decree 4825 of 2011). It established a framework to improve access to housing and urban development in Colombia through easement in urban land management and citizen participation in planning and managing cities (Law 1537 of 2012). With this legislation, the government aimed to transfer part of the inhabitants of informal settlements to VIS through territorial entities' free transfer of urban assets.
Until this point, the Colombian legislation did not have a perspective for Disaster Risk Reduction. However, a series of disasters in 2010 and 2011, which were mainly caused by the La Niña climate event, led to the creation of the National System of Disaster Risk Management (UNGRD) (see Figure 3) and adopted the National Policy of Disaster Risk Management (Law 1523 of 2012). Colombia finally established strategies for disaster prevention, attention, recovery, and mitigation and created the Disaster Risk Management National Fund as an additional measure to reduce disaster impacts on the population and the economy. As part of the mitigation strategies defined by the newly created UNGRD, the Colombian government focused on regulating Disaster Risk Management within the Land-Use Plans (POT) to prevent and reduce the impacts of disasters (Decree 1807 of 2014). It established that the POTs must define strategies to manage and prevent disasters within their territories. It also established the need to conduct hazard, vulnerability, and risk studies in the territories. One of the strategies to reduce disaster risk in the territory was to assess the existing disaster risk in informal settlements and to evaluate their possible relocation.
In 2015, the housing and territorial ordering sectors were further regulated via Decree 1077, focusing on land use planning, land management, construction, housing, essential services, and disaster risk management while aiming to guarantee access to dignified and sustainable housing. More recently, through Decree 149 of 2020, the Colombian government established the conditions and procedures for transferring the national estate to public or private individuals or entities. It also regulates the legalisation of informal urban settlements. In the same year, the national government tackled the legalisation and titling of informal settlements that settled as squatters over ten years prior on public or private land through Law 2044 of 2020. Finally, the most recent piece of legislation from the Colombian Congress regarding informal or subnormal settlements was created through Law 2079 of 2021, establishing a legal framework for legalising informal or subnormal settlements. It frames the technical requirements to identify, select, prioritise, intervene, follow, and evaluate informal settlements. It also presents the proceedings to implement neighbourhood improvement plans. 
Beyond the Laws and Decrees described above, Colombia has developed other public policies that focus completely or partially on land use planning and strategies to promote sustainable development and address challenges such as tenure, natural resource management, and citizen participation. One of Colombia's more relevant public policies is the National Development Plan, which changes every four years as the executive body is elected via popular vote. The National Development Plan 2014 – 2018 was enacting during the studied disaster. Amongst other aspects, it established the importance of promoting territorial planning and land management in Colombia, emphasising the development of policies to support land use planning, the formalisation of property rights, and the protection of natural resources. 
One of the National Development Plan's main goals was to promote equitable access to land to support the sustainable use of natural resources and develop a methodology so cities and districts provide the necessary information to inventory at a nationwide scale the settlements at disaster risk. Additionally, the plan recognised the importance of formalising property rights to support small-scale farmers and indigenous communities (DNP, 2015). In the following presidential period, the National Development Plan 2018 – 2022 was introduced aiming to achieve sustainable territorial development. It recognised the importance of territorial planning and land use regulation to strengthen land governance, including the formalisation of land tenure (DNP, 2019). The subsequent presidential period created the National Development Plan 2022 – 2026, which proposes a new nationwide program called "Peaceful Neighbourhoods" that aims to upgrade and legalise informal settlements, clarifying that none of these can be located in high-risk areas according to their territory planning plan (DNP, 2023).
3.2 Local Policies Review
With the introduction and legislation of Law 388 of 1997, Colombia, in the first instance, defined that every municipality, depending on its population, must create a PBOT or a POT. Since Mocoa had fewer than 100,000 inhabitants in 1997, it needed to create a PBOT, which is a Basic POT. Both are equivalent to a Land-Use Plan and aim to create a pathway towards their cities' development. The POTs must consider ecological and environmental preservation, disaster prevention in highly-risk settlements, as well as the execution of efficient urban actions.
On the 9th of December 2000, the Mayor and Council of the municipality of Mocoa signed and agreed upon the first PBOT, which clarified that there were not enough instruments for planning and regulating the territory (Acuerdo 036, 2000). This PBOT has undergone several revisions, mainly by Corpoamazonia, the regional environment agency for the south of the Colombian Amazon (see Figure 3). This first PBOT had two adjustments in 2002 and 2006. The first focused on the urban component, and the second on the rural component. In 2008, it had a major adjustment, leading to an agreement between the municipality and Corpoamazonia (Acuerdo 028, 2008). 

Fig. 4. The chronological story of the Land Use Plan of the city of Mocoa with the administrative levels involved in each decision is presented, along with the immediate legal response from the different administrative levels to the 2017 disaster.

This PBOT has had different updates, adjustments, and revisions since, as shown in Figure 4. This plan was valid until 2012, as it only had 12 years of validity. However, in 2012, instead of updating the PBOT, there was a new exceptional adjustment with a significant focus on social housing through the Agreement 027 of 2012. A draft for a New PBOT has not been approved yet and was expected to be approved in 2019. Mocoa has also developed a Territorial Development Plan 2020-2023 that articulated with the National Development Plan 2018-2022 to ensure sustainable and equitable development (Acuerdo 006, 2020). 
The current Territorial Development Plan of Mocoa aims to strengthen the resilience of the city's population and infrastructure against future disasters by improving early warning systems, establishing emergency response protocols, and implementing measures to reduce the impact of floods and landslides. The plan also includes investments in public infrastructure and services, such as water supply and sanitation, to ensure the city is better prepared to cope with future disasters. 

4. Disruption of the policies
This section presents a national and local content analysis, comparing land use planning and disaster management responses to the 2017 disaster in Mocoa. To achieve this, we followed a qualitative method that first analysed the contents in all national and local planning documents created from 1997 to the present, alongside their disaster management policies. Second, we studied the contents of these documents to identify any changes and challenges attributed to the 2017 disaster. 
4.1 Disruption of the national landscape on Land Use planning
The 2017 disaster in Mocoa affected how the Colombian government saw land use policies at the lower administrative levels. The national government, through the National Council of Social and Economical Politics (CONPES), created the CONPES 3904 document (DNP, 2017), which established the Special Action Plan for the Reconstruction of Mocoa (UNGRD, 2021). 
Through the CONPES 3904, we can see a clear intent by the national government in updating the PBOT of Mocoa. The first objective of this policy, which was created as a response to the disaster, was to improve the territorial planning and management while aiming towards an urban-rural sustainable development of Mocoa, considering its physical, cultural, and environmental characteristics. This policy established a nine-month period for the municipality to have a new PBOT after the publication of this policy on the 31st of October 2017. However, the optimism behind this did not last long as the citizens heavily rejected it, resulting in an indefinite suspension of the plan to renew the PBOT. 
The CONPES 3904 established that the new PBOT should incorporate the new post-disaster reality beyond the extent of the municipality, considering risk management and the region's environmental conditions. It also included Mocoa in the "POTs Modernos" program executed by the DNP. This program was created to assist technically and financially with creating and modernising the Territorial Planning Plans of the country's departments, municipalities, cities, and districts. The program also aimed to develop a framework to improve this process in the future aligned with the Sustainable Development Goals (DNP, 2016). 
4.2 Disruption of the Local Planning
The 2017 disaster significantly impacted how the municipality of Mocoa looked at its own planning. The municipality realised that its PBOT was out-of-date and that its risk mitigation measures, described in Articles 177 and 178 of the Agreement 028 of 2008, such as hydraulic adequation or rivers and creeks, emergency planning, early warning systems, disincentivising of construction in high-risk zones, and relocation of vulnerable dwellings, amongst others were not met successfully.
As the city was unprepared for a disaster of such magnitude, the rapid development of the post-disaster timeline involving various stakeholders, funding, and aid led to hasty decision-making, as it is often needed during this period (Lizarralde et al., 2010). Different announcements of public calamity and emergency declarations from different administrative levels were issued for the city of Mocoa. On the day after the disaster, 1st of April 2017, the municipality, through the Mayor's Office, declared a Municipal public calamity, which was followed by a Departmental declaration of public calamity. Five days later, on the 6th of April, the Office of the President of Colombia issued a Disaster situation decree for the Municipality of Mocoa and declared a State of economic, social, and ecological emergency. These four decrees from different administrative levels changed the legal framework so the emergency could be better attended, assuring resources and allowing for the execution of emergency management. Finally, on the 19th of April, Corpoamazonia officially delimited the disaster zones through a resolution. These newly established limits had not been considered in the previous PBOT.
As many of the displacements caused by the disaster lived in informal settlements, the city's focus on this type of community living in high-risk areas increased. It developed two subsidy programs. One of these was a rent subsidy that helped over 700 families up until September 2019. The other program was more extensive as it was led by the municipality, backed by the national government, and subsidised new housing for hundreds of victims. The municipality acquired 253,298 m2 of land in the Nueva Esperanza area from private hands back in 2015. Eight weeks after the disaster, the municipality subdivided this land into plots and provided them as housing subsidies to some of the affected population. A new adjustment to the PBOT in 2017 increased the city's urban area as the disaster and its reaction generated a demand for this type of land use (see Fig. 4).
There were 150 official resolutions giving housing subsidies corresponding to the property title of a land plot for Social Interest Housing in the Alto Afán rural district. These were all signed by the mayor on the 25th of May, 2017. Unless a fortuitous occurrence, these subsidies were subject to the receiver residing in the land plot without the possibility of renting or selling for ten years. The subsidy must be returned if the beneficiary does not comply with these conditions. These land plots were exempt from registration fees (Ley 1537, 2012).
The local and national governments established three other types of housing subsidies, and as of September 2022, the progress of these is the following, according to a Monitoring Report of the Special Action Plan for the Reconstruction of Mocoa by the (UNGRD, 2022): 1. New housing subsidies: 300 out of 1,209 households built; 2. New rural housing subsidies in own land: 12 out of 36 households built; 3. Existing household's retrofitting: progress of 46% in the improvement and retrofitting of 300 households.
4.3 Disruption of disaster management practices
Mocoa's Municipal Disaster Management Plan (PMGRD) for its urban and peri-urban areas was formulated in 2013, based on the hazard zones established on the PBOT of 2000 and its 2006 adjustment. It was later articulated with Law 1523 of 2012 to develop geological and hydrological studies in the area, which led to the relocation of 291 buildings before the 2017 Disaster (PUJ & UNGRD, 2018). After the 2017 disaster, the PMGRD has been modified to accommodate the municipality's new Early Warning System and new hazard studies. 
According to EM-DAT, the 2017 disaster was Colombia's second most significant disaster in this century, followed only by the La Niña season of 2010-2011. It has been the deadliest since the National Unit for Disaster Risk Management was created in 2012. The UNGRD responded according to its internal procedures, as documented in a series of situation reports by the Colombian Red Cross. Overall, the disaster and emergency response were executed as planned nationally. However, this disaster shifted the UNGRD and the authorities at different executive levels towards a risk prevention stance to mitigate the disaster risk in the country from an emergency response one. 
Despite this, we can see a partial non-success in the disaster prevention practices implemented after the 2017 disaster, as a similar but smaller disastrous event occurred on the 12th of August 2018, which affected 590 families, corresponding to 4,450 people. A special subsidy program was created for those affected by both disasters. Unfortunately, these numbers are unavailable. 

5. Discussion
Understanding the impact of the 2017 disaster on the different national and local policies surrounding informal urban settlements is critical. This section discusses the disruption of the policies and regulations. Beyond analysing the changes made, we challenge the existing policies via their implementation and effectiveness around the 2017 disaster. Overall, Colombia's laws, decrees, and policies aim to promote sustainable and equitable land use planning and disaster management while addressing issues related to land tenure, natural resource management, and citizens' participation in decision-making processes. While progress has been made, challenges related to land tenure and land use planning persist, particularly in informal settlements and rural areas. The need for effective policies and strategies that promote sustainable and equitable land use planning in Colombia remains a critical issue for the country. 
5.1 Informal Urban Settlements in Mocoa
Despite the constant mention of legalisation and titling for informal urban settlements throughout the national and local policies, there is not much quantitative or qualitative data about them. Some civil programmes and research projects have been developed around informal settlements in Colombia, but their results have not been considered in the local or national urban plans.
The informal settlements affected by the 2017 disaster have been discussed in every POT modification in Mocoa in the last 20 years or since they first appeared. Alongside the discussion around these settlements, the local policies also mention the difficulties involved in trying to relocate the citizens there and their vulnerability to disasters (Acuerdo 036, 2000). Despite this, there was not any major action towards tackling this problem, at least not until the disaster forced the relocation of thousands of families after the destruction of hundreds of dwellings in these settlements. Locals who have been living in the city for decades now shared in a series of interviews conducted by the Colombian Geological Service (SGC) that many of the inhabitants of the affected area by the 2017 disaster were 'relocated' in the past due to their significant exposure to flooding and mudslides. However, many in the community have received land to relocate, sold it, and remained in place (SGC, 2018). The image from 1962 shown in Figure 2 shows a similar event to the 2017 Disaster that occurred back then.
A report by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD, 2019) reviewing Colombia's progress in improving its risk governance and its resilience to disasters highlights the effort to avoid new risks in the country. However, it also highlights the lack of a comprehensive strategy to address informal settlements in disaster-prone areas, even though disaster risk reduction is a priority for the UNGRD. The disaster aggravated the need for more robust policies and actions to address the risks and vulnerabilities faced by residents of informal settlements, particularly in high-risk areas. The policies and actions taken in response to the disaster represent an essential step forward. However, much work still needs to be done to ensure the safety and well-being of those living in informal settlements in Colombia. It is crucial to have public policies focused on reducing disaster risk, specifically by reducing the vulnerability in informal settlements. This is connected to an enhancement of tenure and legalisation laws. 
The characteristics of IUS have led to the realisation that many 'legal' households exist or have been legalised without attending to all these issues. In some countries, the legalisation process is limited to registering the land to the household settled in the area, which assures land tenure but does not necessarily cover the other deprivations. In other cases, legalisation comes after public services are installed, subject to compliance with different regulations (Soler et al., 2018). The next step towards improving land use policies in Mocoa is formulating and approving a new land use plan. It must be modern, risk-informed, sustainable, and resilient. We understand that there is an ongoing process of updating the Land-Use Plan, which has not changed significantly since 2008. This will allow Mocoa to enact new considerations towards the settlements left.
5.2 Land-Use Policies and the evaluation of their effectiveness
The importance of good land-use policies in disaster-prone cities is key. Looking at the case of Mehuín, Puerto Saavedra, and Toltén in Chile (Herrmann‐Lunecke & Villagra, 2020), we can see some similarities between their policies and the ones in Mocoa. The risk reduction strategies in three of the four towns focused on reinforcing early warning systems, not unlike what was done in Mocoa after the disaster (PUJ & UNGRD, 2018). In Toltén, however, a relocation process was carried from a highly vulnerable area to a safe one, similar to what happened in the San Miguel area; only in the Chilean case did it happen before a disaster struck again. From their experience, we can highlight that if the local government incorporates participatory risk zone planning, there must be community involvement in planning processes regarding relocation and risk zone planning.
The current PBOT of Mocoa, which was supposed to be updated in 2012, defined a plan to improve and regulate informal settlements. To achieve this, it planned for technical studies and social programmes. It created a fund for regularising and improving informal settlements, targeting infrastructure works and access to public services in those areas. It had some significant strengths, such as the redefinition of the municipality's urban, suburban, and rural areas; the definition of the residential, commercial, institutional, industrial, and public services areas and green areas; and the regulation of the public space.
However, as discussed before, the 2017 disaster stressed the need to revise and change the outdated PBOT. The opportunity to create a new and modern PBOT was part of the recovery efforts; however, it has been under construction for more than five years and has failed to be approved by the citizens and the city's council. One of the main reasons behind this is that the new modern PBOT was decided to be designed by a foreign company, and the locals had strong opinions about this. Many pointed out that a lack of knowledge of the territory and the social dynamics within would lead to delays in constructing this critical piece of policy (Palomo, 2021). 
Even though the 2017 disaster has led the national government of Colombia to take further action in territorial ordering, disaster risk management and mitigation, many of these actions are pointless if the local governments cannot agree on progress. Suppose the Colombian government focuses only on relocating the informal settlers to Social Interest Housing. In that case, they can face a similar phenomenon that Portugal faced: the lack of citizen participation and forced evictions failed to incorporate the ex-informal inhabitants into the formal urban housing and peripheralised the vulnerable population. However, their more recent housing policies allow for individual or cooperative re-housing and strengthen the urban regeneration process (Tarsi, 2020).
In many cases, the inclusion of the citizens in creating a decision-making tool is relevant and necessary to avoid inequality. However, without proper divulgation and participation in these plans, the community could feel left out and politically block the much-needed progress. As Collado et al. (2020) concluded in their multi-case analysis of informality, a comprehensive approach to urban planning and policy can contribute to a better recovery that can prevent future re-settlements and transform the social realities of the citizens, limiting the proliferation and expansion of the informal settlements that were not destroyed.
5.3 Disaster Management Policies and their implementation
The laws and regulations, both national and local, have been consistently designed to understand disaster risk and mitigate it. However, they have not been appropriately enacted. For instance, through its Ministry of Housing, City and Territory, the national government promptly developed a guide and methodology for municipalities and districts to identify and locate settlements in disaster risk, as required in Colombia's National Development Plan 2014-2018 (MVCT & World-Bank, 2014). Unfortunately, as of 2020, only 10 out of 1,154 municipalities had advanced on this matter. 
The 2017 disaster led to a legal framework that allowed for public calamity and emergency to be declared. The seventh chapter of Law 1523 of 2012 focuses on the special regime that arises after a declaration of calamity and emergency, which allows the administration to initiate new contracts without a lengthy bidding process. It also allows the government to negotiate plots of land or expropriate them. This declaration was vital in starting the reconstruction process of Mocoa and simultaneously to the attention to the emergency (UNGRD, 2018). 
As Doberstein and Stager (2013) described, no guidelines include informal settlements in the post-disaster reconstruction process. As mentioned before, the 2017 disaster in Mocoa led to solutions directly focused towards the affected people from informal settlements; however, these have taken years longer than what was initially planned and promised to the affected people. Unfortunately, we have seen similar occurrences in other cases. For example, Lizarralde (2014) describes how, after the 2010 earthquake in Haiti, some international construction companies promised aid and relief in the form of "temporary high-tech units", which took much longer than promised to arrive. This, along with other issues in the official reconstruction process, caused affected people to relocate to other informal settlements and rapid informal growth there.
Ever since the 2017 mudslide, there have been three more massive mudslides; however, the new risk mitigation measures and disaster management policies seem to have partially reduced the people's risk, and there is more attention towards informal settlements. One of the highest justice tribunals of Colombia, the Administrative Tribunal of Cundinamarca, declared in 2022 that the national government was responsible for the losses as the 2017 disaster was predictable. This, as different planning and disaster management documents warned about the hazards in Mocoa, meaning that the local vulnerability was known. It also highlighted the lack of compliance on risk mitigation and prevention and the non-relocation of the settlements in the highest-risk zone by UNGRD, Corpoamazonia, Putumayo Department, Mocoa municipality, and the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development by not adopting the necessary preventative measures to avoid the losses (Quevedo, 2022). 

6. Conclusions
The increased vulnerability and exposure to hazards present in many informal settlements in the 'Global South' highlights the need to examine their importance within land use planning and disaster management policies beyond land use restrictions or relocation as the only tools to reduce disaster risk. This research reaffirms the need to involve effective disaster risk reduction within planning policies at a national and local level but accentuates the importance of engaging with the people living in informal urban settlements. As the Municipal Disaster Management Plan has been updated to include the new Early Warning Systems, participatory planning could play a key role in its improvement and divulgation, increasing community resilience. 
Our research considered how, in the case of Mocoa, there was no sufficient intervention to prevent the deaths and losses caused by the 2017 disaster, especially those in the informal urban settlements. Every land use and risk management plan in Mocoa depicts hazardous land as susceptible to debris flows, mudslides and floodings based on historical events. However, the most affected areas by the 2017 disaster were those designated high-hazard areas. 
The 2017 disaster should have disrupted the current land use plans. Unfortunately, no proper land use plan update has been enacted so far. Furthermore, despite no apparent improvements in the land use planning of Mocoa, we identified a lack of understanding from the local government regarding the importance of community resilience and engagement in the planning processes in relation to land use restrictions and relocation. Some of the re-housing options for the affected families of the informal urban settlements should target not only individuals but also associations and cooperatives of informal settlers. Improving the quality of cities through policies is not necessarily connected with the improvement of the functioning of cities. 
The identified issues in this article can be a starting point for local decision-makers to improve their attention to housing informality in the different stages of the disaster process, regardless of the local particularities. While we acknowledge that every informal settlement is different, and their vulnerabilities to different disasters can change, we believe that this research contributes to understanding some of the effects of a disaster in the informal urban process of a city, effectively improving urban management on different administrative levels.
Overall, this research confined its reach to the policies that appeared because of the 2017 disaster. However, other disasters, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, also affected national legislation and public policies and increased the number of informal settlements across the country. In the future, this research intends to spatially analyse the effects of the land-use and disaster management policies on the growth of the informal settlements in Mocoa through Earth Observation and Machine Learning methodologies. This will help understand the effectiveness of the new policies and detect reconstruction, if any, on the original disaster sites. 

References
Acuerdo 028 de 2008. Por medio del cual se ajusta, complementa y adopta el Plan Básico de Ordenamiento Territorial para el Municipio de San Miguel de Agreda Mocoa, se redefinen los usos del componente urbano y se dictan disposiciones para el suelo suburbano, suelo rural y de protección., Concejo Municipal de Mocoa (2008).
Acuerdo 036 del 2000. Por medio del cual se adopta el Plan Básico de Ordenamiento Territorial del Municipio de San Miguel de Agreda de Mocoa, Concejo Municipal de Mocoa (2000).
Acuerdo No 006 de Mayo 31 de 2020, Concejo Municipal de Mocoa, Plan de Desarrollo 2020-2023 (2020).
Aguilar, A. G., & Santos, C. (2011). Informal settlements' needs and environmental conservation in Mexico City: An unsolved challenge for land-use policy. Land Use Policy, 28(4), 649–662. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2010.11.002
Auto 373 de 2016. Pautas y criterios para el levantamiento del estado de cosas inconstitucional en materia de desplazamiento forzado, Corte Constitucional de Colombia (2016).
Brinkley, C., & Stahmer, C. (2021). What Is in a Plan? Using Natural Language Processing to Read 461 California City General Plans. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 0739456X2199589. https://doi.org/10.1177/0739456x21995890
CEPAL (United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean). (2017). Panorama multidimensional del desarrollo urbano en América Latina y el Caribe (L. Moreno & J. Garcia, Eds.). Naciones Unidas.
Collado, J. R. N., & Wang, H.-H. (2020). Slum upgrading and climate change adaptation and mitigation: Lessons from Latin America. Cities, 104, 102791. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cities.2020.102791
CRED (Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters), EM-DAT (Emergency Events Database), & UNISDR (United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction). (2016). Poverty & Death: Disaster Mortality 1996-2015.
DANE (Departamento Administrativo Nacional de Estadística). (2020). Proyecciones y retroproyecciones de población municipal para el periodo 1985-2017 y 2018-2035 con base en el CNPV 2018. Departamento Administrativo Nacional de Estadística. https://www.dane.gov.co/index.php/estadisticas-por-tema/demografia-y-poblacion/proyecciones-de-poblacion
DANE (Departamento Administrativo Nacional de Estadística). (2021). Boletín Técnico: Déficit Habitacional. Encuesta Nacional de Calidad de Vida (ECV) 2020. Departamento Administrativo Nacional de Estadística.
Decreto 149 de 2020. Por medio del cual se reglamentan los artículos 276 y 277 de la Ley 1955 de 2019, el artículo 41 de la Ley 1537 de 2012 y se modifica el Decreto 1077 de 2015 Único Reglamentario del Sector Vivienda, Ciudad y Territorio, en lo relacionado con la transferencia de bienes inmuebles fiscales y la legalización urbanística de asentamientos humanos, Presidencia de la República de Colombia (2020).
Decreto 564 de 2006. Por el cual se reglamentan las disposiciones relativas a las licencias urbanísticas; al reconocimiento de edificaciones; a la función pública que desempeñan los curadores urbanos; a la legalización de asentamientos humanos constituidos por viviendas de Interés Social, y se expiden otras disposiciones, Presidencia de la República de Colombia, DO: 46.192 (2006).
Decreto 1077 de 2015. Por medio del cual se expide el Decreto Único Reglamentario del Sector Vivienda, Ciudad y Territorio, Presidencia de la República de Colombia, DO: 49.523 (2015).
Decreto 1807 de 2014. Por el cual se reglamenta el artículo 189 del Decreto-ley 019 de 2012 en lo relativo a la incorporación de la gestión del riesgo en los planes de ordenamiento territorial y se dictan otras disposiciones, Presidencia de la República de Colombia, DO: 49.279 (2014).
Decreto 3600 de 2007. Por el cual se reglamentan las disposiciones de las Leyes 99 de 1993 y 388 de 1997 relativas a las determinantes de ordenamiento del suelo rural y al desarrollo de actuaciones urbanísticas de parcelación y edificación en este tipo de suelo y se adoptan otras disposiciones, Presidencia de la República de Colombia, DO: 46.757 (2007).
Decreto 4825 de 2011. Por el cual se reglamentan los artículos 2°, 4°, 6° y 7° de la Ley 1001 de 2005 y parcialmente el artículo 90 de la Ley 1151 de 2007, en materia de transferencia gratuita de bienes fiscales urbanos para el desarrollo de programas de vivienda de interés social y se dictan otras disposiciones, Presidencia de la República de Colombia, DO: 48.289 (2011).
DNP (Departamento Nacional de Planeación). (2009). Documento CONPES 3604 (DNP, Ed.). Departamento Nacional de Planeación. https://colaboracion.dnp.gov.co/CDT/Conpes/Econ%C3%B3micos/3604.pdf
DNP (Departamento Nacional de Planeación). (2015). Plan Nacional de Desarrollo 2014 - 2018: Todos por un nuevo país.
DNP (Departamento Nacional de Planeación). (2016). Documento CONPES 3870 (DNP, Ed.). Departamento Nacional de Planeación. https://colaboracion.dnp.gov.co/CDT/Conpes/Econ%C3%B3micos/3870.pdf
DNP (Departamento Nacional de Planeación). (2017). Documento CONPES 3904. Departamento Nacional de Planeación. http://portal.gestiondelriesgo.gov.co/mocoa/Documents/CONPES-3904-MOCOA.pdf
DNP (Departamento Nacional de Planeación). (2019). Plan Nacional de Desarrollo 2018 - 2022: Pacto por Colombia, pacto por la equidad.
DNP (Departamento Nacional de Planeación). (2023). Plan Nacional de Desarrollo 2022 - 2026: Colombia potencia mundial de la vida.
Doberstein, B., & Stager, H. (2013). Towards guidelines for post‐disaster vulnerability reduction in informal settlements. Disasters, 37(1), 28–47. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7717.2012.01294.x
Goytia, C., Heikkila, E. J., & Pasquini, R. A. (2023). Do land use regulations help give rise to informal settlements? Evidence from Buenos Aires. Land Use Policy, 125, 106484. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2022.106484
Hardoy, J., Gencer, E., & Winograd, M. (2019). Participatory planning for climate resilient and inclusive urban development in Dosquebradas, Santa Ana and Santa Tomé. Environment & Urbanization, 31(1).
Herrmann‐Lunecke, M. G., & Villagra, P. (2020). Community resilience and urban planning in tsunami‐prone settlements in Chile. Disasters, 44(1), 103–124. https://doi.org/10.1111/disa.12369
Jankowska, M. M., Weeks, J. R., & Engstrom, R. (2011). Do the most vulnerable people live in the worst slums? A spatial analysis of Accra, Ghana. Annals of GIS, 17(4), 221–235. https://doi.org/10.1080/19475683.2011.625976
Ley 388 de 1997. Por la cual se modifica la Ley 9a de 1989, y la Ley 3a de 1991 y se dictan otras disposiciones, Congreso de la República de Colombia, DO: 43.091 (1997).
Ley 507 de 1999. Por la cual se modifica la Ley 388 de 1997, Congreso de la República de Colombia, DO: 43.652 (1999).
Ley 810 de 2003. Por medio de la cual se modifica la Ley 388 de 1997 en materia de sanciones urbanísticas y algunas actuaciones de los curadores urbanos y se dictan otras disposiciones, Congreso de la República de Colombia, DO: 45.220 (2003).
Ley 1454 de 2011. Por la cual se dictan normas orgánicas sobre ordenamiento territorial y se modifican otras disposiciones, Congreso de la República de Colombia, DO: 48.115 (2011).
Ley 1523 de 2012. Por la cual se adopta la política nacional de gestión del riesgo de desastres y se establece el Sistema Nacional de Gestión del Riesgo de Desastres y se dictan otras disposiciones, Congreso de la República de Colombia, DO: 48.411 (2012).
Ley 1537 de 2012. Por la cual se dictan normas tendientes a facilitar y promover el desarrollo urbano y el acceso a la vivienda y se dictan otras disposiciones, Congreso de la República de Colombia, DO: 48.467 (2012).
Ley 2044 de 2020. Por el cual se dictan normas para el saneamiento de predios ocupados por asentamientos humanos ilegales y se dictan otras disposiciones, Congreso de la República de Colombia, DO: 51.391 (2020).
Ley 2079 de 2021. Por medio de la cual se dictan disposiciones en materia de vivienda y hábitat, Congreso de la República de Colombia (2021).
Lizarralde, G. (2014). The Invisible Houses. Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315749600
Lizarralde, G., Johnson, C., & Davidson, C. (Eds.). (2010). Rebuilding after disasters. From emergency to sustainability. Spon Press.
Magalhães, F., Restrepo, P. A., Lonardoni, F., & Moris, R. (2016). Slum Upgrading and Housing in Latin America. https://doi.org/10.18235/0000402
Miles, S. B., Green, R. A., & Svekla, W. (2012). Disaster risk reduction capacity assessment for precarious settlements in Guatemala City. Disasters, 36(3), 365–381. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7717.2011.01267.x
Morales, J., Flacke, J., & Zevenbergen, J. (2019). Modelling residential land values using geographic and geometric accessibility in Guatemala City. Environment and Planning B: Urban Analytics and City Science, 46(4), 239980831772633. https://doi.org/10.1177/2399808317726332
MVCT (Ministerio de Vivienda, Ciudad y Territorio), & World-Bank. (2014). Guía Metodológica para el Inventario de Asentamientos en Zonas de Alto Riesgo. World Bank.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). (2019). Risk Governance Scan of Colombia. OECD Reviews of Risk Management Policies. https://doi.org/10.1787/eeb81954-en
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). (2022). National Urban Policy Review of Colombia. OECD Urban Studies. https://doi.org/10.1787/9ca1caae-en
Palomo, Y. P. (2021). Ordenamiento territorial en Mocoa. Una nueva configuración territorial posdesastre. Universidad Nacional de Colombia.
Pérez-Molina, E., Sliuzas, R., Flacke, J., & Jetten, V. (2017). Developing a cellular automata model of urban growth to inform spatial policy for flood mitigation: A case study in Kampala, Uganda. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 65, 53–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2017.04.013
Planet (2018). Planet Application Program Interface: In Space for Life on Earth. Planet Labs PBC. https://api.planet.com
Prada-Sarmiento, L. F., Cabrera, M. A., Camacho, R., Estrada, N., & Ramos-Cañón, A. M. (2019). The Mocoa Event on the 31st of March (2017): analysis of a series of mass movements in a tropical environment of the Andean-Amazonian Piedmont. Landslides, 16(12), 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10346-019-01263-y
PUJ (Pontificia Universidad Javeriana), & UNGRD (Unidad Nacional de Gestión de Riesgo de Desastres). (2018). Consultoría de los estudios de diseño del sistema de alerta temprana para avenidas torrenciales y crecientes súbitas generadas por precipitaciones de la microcuenca de los ríos Mulato, Sangoyaco, quebradas Taruca y Taruquita del municipio de Mocoa, en el marco de las declaratorias de calamidad pública y desastre del Municipio de Mocoa - Putumayo, debidas al evento presentado el 31 de marzo de 2017.
Quevedo, D. (2022). Responsabilidad del Estado por la avenida torrencial en Mocoa y la necesidad de una justicia climática global. https://medioambiente.uexternado.edu.co/responsabilidad-del-estado-por-la-avenida-torrencial-en-mocoa-y-la-necesidad-de-una-justicia-climatica-global/
Sánchez-Steiner, L. M. (2007). Impacto urbano del desplazamiento forzado en Mocoa - Putumayo (CINEP, Ed.). CINEP.
Sánchez-Steiner, L. M. (2012). La ciudad-refugio : migración forzada y reconfiguración territorial urbana en Colombia: el caso Mocoa (U. del Norte, Ed.).
SGC (Servicio Geológico Colombiano). (2018). Evaluación de la amenaza por movimientos en masa en el área urbana, periurbana y de expansión del Municipio de Mocoa-Putmuayo. Escala 1:5.000 (S. G. Colombiano, Ed.). https://recordcenter.sgc.gov.co/B22/532_18%20AmeMovMasa%20Urbana%20Periurb%20Mocoa%205K/DOCUMENTO/PDF/Informe%205K%20Mocoa.pdf
Soler, J. E., Rodríguez, J. L., Torres, J., Legal, C. O., Pérez, E., & CENAC. (2018). Legalización de asentamientos informales. Contribuciones para una política pública que beneficie a la población desplazada (C. O. Legal & CENAC, Eds.).
UNGRD (Unidad Nacional de Gestión de Riesgo de Desastres). (2018). Colombia menos vulnerable. La gestión del riesgo de desastres en nuestra historia. Tomo IV (Vol. 4).
UNGRD (Unidad Nacional de Gestión de Riesgo de Desastres). (2021). PAE para la reconstrucción de Mocoa.
UNGRD (Unidad Nacional de Gestión de Riesgo de Desastres). (2022). Seguimiento obras plan de reconstrucción Mocoa.
UN-Habitat (United Nations Human Settlements Programme). (2015). Habitat III issue paper 22 - Informal Settlements. UN-Habitat. https://habitat3.org/wp-content/uploads/Habitat-III-Issue-Paper-22_Informal-Settlements-2.0.pdf
UN-Habitat (United Nations Human Settlements Programme). (2017). Slum Almanac 2015-2016. Tracking Improvement in the Lives of Slum Dwellers (P. S. U. Programme, Ed.). UNON.
UN-Habitat (United Nations Human Settlements Programme). (2018). Sustainable Development Goal 11: A Guide to Assist National and Local Governments to Monitor and Report on SDG Goal 11+ Indicators. The United Nations. https://data.opendevelopmentmekong.net/library_record/sustainable-development-goal-11-a-guide-to-assist-national-and-local-governments-to-monitor-and-rep
UN-Habitat (United Nations Human Settlements Programme). (2022). The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2022 (The Sustainable Development Goals Report, p. 68).
World-Bank. (2021). Managing Urban Spatial Growth: World Bank Support to Land Administration, Planning, and Development. 

1 This research refers to slums as Informal Urban Settlements or IUS, as a shortening of "settlements of informal origin", which is the corresponding term in Colombian legislation under Decreto 149 of 2020.
2 In Colombia, Land-Use Plans are named POT and PBOT depending on the population of the municipalities. POT stands for Plan de Ordenamiento Territorial, and PBOT stands for Plan Básico de Ordenamiento Territorial.



